### How can I commit changes selectively?
You don't have to put all of the changes you have made recently into the staging area at once. For example, suppose you are adding a feature to `analysis.R` and spot a bug in `cleanup.R`. After you have fixed, you want to save your work. Since the changes to `cleanup.R` aren't directly related to the work you're doing in `analysis.R`, you should save your work in two separate commits.

### How do I re-stage files?
People often save their work every few minutes when they're using a desktop text editor. Similarly, it's common to use `git add` periodically to save the most recent changes to a file to the staging area. This is particularly useful when the changes are experimental and you might want to undo them without cluttering up the repository's history.

### How can I undo changes to unstaged files?
Suppose you have made changes to a file, then decide you want to undo them. Your text editor may be able to do this, but a more reliable way is to let Git do the work. The command:

```
  git checkout -- filename
```
will discard the changes that have not yet been staged. (The double dash `--` must be there to separate the `git checkout` command from the names of the file or files you want to recover.)

Use this command carefully: once you discard changes in this way, they are gone forever.

### How can I unstage a file that I have staged?
`git checkout -- filename` will undo changes that have not yet been staged. If you want to undo changes that have been staged, you can use `git reset HEAD filename`. This does not restore the file to the state it was in before you started making changes. Instead, it resets the file to the state you last staged. If you want to go all the way back to where you were before you started making changes, you must `git checkout -- filename` as well.

(You may be wondering why there are two commands for re-setting changes. The answer is that unstaging a file and undoing changes are both special cases of more powerful Git operations that you have not yet seen.)

reset хийж байгаа нь add хийсэн файлаа буцааж байна.

### How do I restore an old version of a file?
Since Git stores old versions of your files, you can use it to restore those files when you want to undo changes. The command for doing this is `git checkout`, which takes two arguments: the hash that identifies the version you want to restore, and the name of the file. For example, if `git log` shows this:

```
commit ab8883e8a6bfa873d44616a0f356125dbaccd9ea
Author: Author: Rep Loop <repl@datacamp.com>
Date:   Thu Oct 19 09:37:48 2017 -0400

    Adding graph to show latest quarterly results.

commit 2242bd761bbeafb9fc82e33aa5dad966adfe5409
Author: Author: Rep Loop <repl@datacamp.com>
Date:   Thu Oct 16 09:17:37 2017 -0400

    Modifying the bibliography format.
```

then `git checkout 2242bd report.txt` would replace `report.txt` with whatever was committed on October 16.

Restoring a file doesn't erase any of the repository's history. Instead, the act of restoring the file is saved as another commit, because you might later want to undo your undoing.

### How can I undo all of the changes I have made?
So far, you have seen how to undo changes to a single file at a time. You will sometimes want to undo changes to many files. One way to do this is to give `git reset` and `git checkout` a directory as an argument rather than the names of one or more files. For example, `git reset HEAD data` will unstage any files from the data directory that you have staged, and `git checkout -- data` will then restore those files to their previous state.

```
  git reset HEAD .
```
