### How can I create a brand new repository?
So far, you have been working with repositories that we created. If you want to create a repository for a new project, you can simply say `git init project-name`, where "project-name" is the name you want the new repository's root directory to have.

One thing you should not do is create one Git repository inside another. While Git does allow this, updating nested repositories becomes very complicated very quickly, since you need to tell Git which of the two .git directories the update is to be stored in. Very large projects occasionally need to do this, but most programmers and data analysts try to avoid getting into this situation.

### How can I turn an existing project into a Git repository?
Experienced Git users instinctively start new projects by creating repositories. If you are new to Git, though, or working with people who are, you will often want to convert existing projects into repositories. Doing so is simple: just run `git init` in the project's root directory, or `git init /path/to/project` from anywhere else on your computer.

### How can I create a copy of an existing repository?
Sometimes you will join a project that is already running, inherit a project from someone else, or continue working on one of your own projects on a new machine. In each case, you will clone an existing repository instead of creating a new one. Cloning a repository does exactly what the name suggests: it creates a copy of an existing repository (including all of its history) in a new directory.

To clone a repository, use the command `git clone URL`, where `URL` identifies the repository you want to clone. This will normally be something like `https://github.com/datacamp/project.git`, but for this lesson, we will use filesystem URLs of the form `file:///existing/project`. The number of slashes at the start is important: the first part of the URL is `file://`, and then there is a third slash to start the absolute path `/existing/project`.

When you clone a repository, Git uses the name of the existing repository as the name of the clone's root directory: for example, `git clone file:///existing/project` will create a new directory called `project`. If you want to call the clone something else, add the directory name you want to the command.

```
  git clone file:///home/thunk/repo dental
```

### How can I find out where a cloned repository originated?
When you a clone a repository, Git remembers where the original repository was. It does this by storing a remote in the new repository's configuration. A remote is like a browser bookmark with a name and a URL. If you are in a repository, you can list the names of its remotes using `git remote`.

If you want more information, you can use `git remote -v` (for "verbose"), which shows the remote's URLs. Note that "URLs" is plural: it's possible for a remote to have several URLs associated with it for different purposes, though in practice each remote is almost always paired with just one URL.

### How can I define remotes?
When you clone a repository, Git automatically creates a remote called `origin` that points to the original repository. You can add more remotes using:

```
git remote add remote-name URL
```

and remove existing ones using:

```
git remote rm remote-name
```

You can connect any two Git repositories this way, but in practice, you will almost always connect repositories that share some common ancestry.

### How can I pull in changes from a remote repository?
Git keeps track of remote repositories so that you can pull changes from those repositories and push changes to them. Pulling changes is straightforward: the command `git pull remote branch` gets everything in `branch` in the remote repository identified by `remote` and merges it into the current branch of your local repository. For example, if you are in the `quarterly-report` branch of your local repository, the command:

```
git pull thunk latest-analysis
```

would get changes from `latest-analysis` branch in the repository associated with the remote called `thunk` and merge them into your `quarterly-report` branch.


### What happens if I try to pull when I have unsaved changes?
Just as Git stops you from switching branches when you have unsaved work, it also stops you from pulling in changes from a remote repository when doing so might overwrite things you have done locally. The fix is simple: either commit your local changes or revert them, and then try to pull again.

Discard the changes in your repository.
```
   git checkout --
```

### How can I push my changes to a remote repository?
The complement of git pull is git push, which pushes the changes you have made locally into a remote repository. The most common way to use it is:

```
git push remote-name branch-name
```

which pushes the contents of your branch branch-name into a branch with the same name in the remote repository associated with remote-name. It's possible to use different branch names at your end and the remote's end, but doing this quickly becomes confusing: it's almost always better to use the same names for branches across repositories.
