### Variable assignment
```
  my_var <- 4
```


### What's that data type?
```
my_numeric <- 42
my_character <- "universe"
my_logical <- FALSE

boolean - (FALSE, TRUE) must UPPERCASE
```

Do you remember that when you added `5 + "six"`, you got an error due to a mismatch in data types? You can avoid such embarrassing situations by checking the data type of a variable beforehand. You can do this with the `class()` function, as the code on the right shows.

# Vector

### Create a vector
Feeling lucky? You better, because this chapter takes you on a trip to the City of Sins, also known as Statisticians Paradise!

Thanks to R and your new data-analytical skills, you will learn how to uplift your performance at the tables and fire off your career as a professional gambler. This chapter will show how you can easily keep track of your betting progress and how you can do some simple analyses on past actions. Next stop, Vegas Baby... VEGAS!!
```
  vegas <- "Go!"
```

### Create a vector (2)
Let us focus first!

On your way from rags to riches, you will make extensive use of vectors. Vectors are one-dimension arrays that can hold numeric data, character data, or logical data. In other words, a vector is a simple tool to store data. For example, you can store your daily gains and losses in the casinos.

In R, you create a vector with the combine function `c()`. You place the vector elements separated by a comma between the parentheses. For example:

```
numeric_vector <- c(1, 2, 3)
character_vector <- c("a", "b", "c")
```


### Create a vector (3)
After one week in Las Vegas and still zero Ferraris in your garage, you decide that it is time to start using your data analytical superpowers.

Before doing a first analysis, you decide to first collect all the winnings and losses for the last week:

For poker_vector:
```
On Monday you won $140
Tuesday you lost $50
Wednesday you won $20
Thursday you lost $120
Friday you won $240
For roulette_vector:

On Monday you lost $24
Tuesday you lost $50
Wednesday you won $100
Thursday you lost $350
Friday you won $10
```
You only played poker and roulette, since there was a delegation of mediums that occupied the craps tables. To be able to use this data in R, you decide to create the variables poker_vector and roulette_vector.

```
# Poker winnings from Monday to Friday
poker_vector <- c(140, -50, 20, -120, 240)

# Roulette winnings from Monday to Friday
roulette_vector <- c(-24, -50, 100, -350, 10)
```


### Naming a vector
As a data analyst, it is important to have a clear view on the data that you are using. Understanding what each element refers to is therefore essential.

In the previous exercise, we created a vector with your winnings over the week. Each vector element refers to a day of the week but it is hard to tell which element belongs to which day. It would be nice if you could show that in the vector itself.

You can give a name to the elements of a vector with the `names()` function. Have a look at this example:
```
some_vector <- c("John Doe", "poker player")
names(some_vector) <- c("Name", "Profession")
```

This code first creates a vector some_vector and then gives the two elements a name. The first element is assigned the name Name, while the second element is labeled Profession. Printing the contents to the console yields following output:

```
          Name     Profession
    "John Doe" "poker player"
```

### Naming a vector (2)
```
# Poker winnings from Monday to Friday
poker_vector <- c(140, -50, 20, -120, 240)

# Roulette winnings from Monday to Friday
roulette_vector <- c(-24, -50, 100, -350, 10)

# The variable days_vector
days_vector <- c("Monday", "Tuesday", "Wednesday", "Thursday", "Friday")

# Assign the names of the day to roulette_vector and poker_vector
names(poker_vector) <- days_vector
names(roulette_vector) <- days_vector
```

### Calculating total winnings
To get the answers, you have to do arithmetic calculations on vectors.
It is important to know that if you sum two vectors in R, it takes the element-wise sum. For example, the following three statements are completely equivalent:

```
c(1, 2, 3) + c(4, 5, 6)
c(1 + 4, 2 + 5, 3 + 6)
c(5, 7, 9)

a <- c(1, 2, 3)
b <- c(4, 5, 6)
c <- a + b
```

### Calculating total winnings (3)
A function that helps you to answer this question is `sum()`. It calculates the sum of all elements of a vector. For example, to calculate the total amount of money you have lost/won with poker you do:
```
total_poker <- sum(poker_vector)
```

### Vector selection: the good times
`poker_vector[1]`

Notice that the first element in a vector has index 1, not 0 as in many other programming languages.

### Vector selection: the good times (2)
How about analyzing your midweek results?

To select multiple elements from a vector, you can add square brackets at the end of it. You can indicate between the brackets what elements should be selected. For example: suppose you want to select the first and the fifth day of the week: use the vector `c(1, 5)` between the square brackets. For example, the code below selects the first and fifth element of `poker_vector`:
```
poker_vector[c(1, 5)]
```

### Vector selection: the good times (3)
Selecting multiple elements of `poker_vector` with `c(2, 3, 4)` is not very convenient. Many statisticians are lazy people by nature, so they created an easier way to do this: `c(2, 3, 4)` can be abbreviated to `2:4`, which generates a vector with all natural numbers from 2 up to 4.

So, another way to find the mid-week results is `poker_vector[2:4]`. Notice how the vector `2:4` is placed between the square brackets to select element 2 up to 4.
