In this chapter you will learn how to work with matrices in R. By the end of the chapter, you will be able to create matrices and to understand how you can do basic computations with them. You will analyze the box office numbers of Star Wars to illustrate the use of matrices in R. May the force be with you!

### What's a matrix?
In R, a matrix is a collection of elements of the same data type (numeric, character, or logical) arranged into a fixed number of rows and columns. Since you are only working with rows and columns, a matrix is called two-dimensional.

You can construct a matrix in R with the `matrix()` function. Consider the following example:

```
matrix(1:9, byrow = TRUE, nrow = 3)
```

In the `matrix()` function:

* The first argument is the collection of elements that R will arrange into the rows and columns of the matrix. Here, we use `1:9` which is a shortcut for `c(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9)`.

* The argument `byrow` indicates that the matrix is filled by the rows. If we want the matrix to be filled by the columns, we just place `byrow = FALSE`.

* The third argument `nrow` indicates that the matrix should have three rows.

### Naming a matrix
To help you remember what is stored in `star_wars_matrix`, you would like to add the names of the movies for the rows. Not only does this help you to read the data, but it is also useful to select certain elements from the matrix.

Similar to vectors, you can add names for the rows and the columns of a matrix
```
rownames(my_matrix) <- row_names_vector
colnames(my_matrix) <- col_names_vector
```

We went ahead and prepared two vectors for you: `region`, and `titles`. You will need these vectors to name the columns and rows of `star_wars_matrix`, respectively.

```
# Box office Star Wars (in millions!)
new_hope <- c(460.998, 314.4)
empire_strikes <- c(290.475, 247.900)
return_jedi <- c(309.306, 165.8)

# Construct matrix
star_wars_matrix <- matrix(c(new_hope, empire_strikes, return_jedi), nrow = 3, byrow = TRUE)

# Vectors region and titles, used for naming
region <- c("US", "non-US")
titles <- c("A New Hope", "The Empire Strikes Back", "Return of the Jedi")

# Name the columns with region
colnames(star_wars_matrix) <- region

# Name the rows with titles
rownames(star_wars_matrix) <- titles

star_wars_matrix
```

### Calculating the worldwide box office
The single most important thing for a movie in order to become an instant legend in Tinseltown is its worldwide box office figures.

To calculate the total box office revenue for the three Star Wars movies, you have to take the sum of the US revenue column and the non-US revenue column.

In R, the function `rowSums()` conveniently calculates the totals for each row of a matrix. This function creates a new vector:

```
rowSums(my_matrix)
```

```
# Construct star_wars_matrix
box_office <- c(460.998, 314.4, 290.475, 247.900, 309.306, 165.8)
star_wars_matrix <- matrix(box_office, nrow = 3, byrow = TRUE,
                           dimnames = list(c("A New Hope", "The Empire Strikes Back", "Return of the Jedi"),
                                           c("US", "non-US")))

# Calculate worldwide box office figures
worldwide_vector <- rowSums(star_wars_matrix)

worldwide_vector
```

### Adding a column for the Worldwide box office
In the previous exercise you calculated the vector that contained the worldwide box office receipt for each of the three Star Wars movies. However, this vector is not yet part of `star_wars_matrix`.

You can add a column or multiple columns to a matrix with the `cbind()` function, which merges matrices and/or vectors together by column. For example:

```
big_matrix <- cbind(matrix1, matrix2, vector1 ...)
```

```
# Construct star_wars_matrix
box_office <- c(460.998, 314.4, 290.475, 247.900, 309.306, 165.8)
star_wars_matrix <- matrix(box_office, nrow = 3, byrow = TRUE,
                           dimnames = list(c("A New Hope", "The Empire Strikes Back", "Return of the Jedi"),
                                           c("US", "non-US")))

# The worldwide box office figures
worldwide_vector <- rowSums(star_wars_matrix)

# Bind the new variable worldwide_vector as a column to star_wars_matrix
all_wars_matrix <- cbind(star_wars_matrix, worldwide_vector)

all_wars_matrix
```

### Adding a row
Just like every action has a reaction, every `cbind()` has an `rbind()`. (We admit, we are pretty bad with metaphors.)

```
# Combine both Star Wars trilogies in one matrix
all_wars_matrix <- rbind(star_wars_matrix, star_wars_matrix2)
```

### The total box office revenue for the entire saga
Just like every `cbind()` has a `rbind()`, every `colSums()` has a `rowSums()`. Your R workspace already contains the `all_wars_matrix` that you constructed in the previous exercise; type `all_wars_matrix` to have another look. Let's now calculate the total box office revenue for the entire saga.

```
# all_wars_matrix is available in your workspace
all_wars_matrix

# Total revenue for US and non-US
total_revenue_vector <- colSums(all_wars_matrix)

# Print out total_revenue_vector
total_revenue_vector
```

### Selection of matrix elements
Similar to vectors, you can use the square brackets `[ ]` to select one or multiple elements from a matrix. Whereas vectors have one dimension, matrices have two dimensions. You should therefore use a comma to separate that what to select from the rows from that what you want to select from the columns. For example:

* `my_matrix[1,2]` selects the element at the first row and second column.
* `my_matrix[1:3,2:4]` results in a matrix with the data on the rows 1, 2, 3 and columns 2, 3, 4.

If you want to select all elements of a row or a column, no number is needed before or after the comma, respectively:

* `my_matrix[,1]` selects all elements of the first column.
* `my_matrix[1,]` selects all elements of the first row.


### A little arithmetic with matrices
Similar to what you have learned with vectors, the standard operators like `+`, `-`, `/`, `*`, etc. work in an element-wise way on matrices in R.

For example, 2 * my_matrix multiplies each element of my_matrix by two.


### A little arithmetic with matrices (2)
my_matrix1 * my_matrix2
