
Very often, data falls into a limited number of categories. For example, human hair color can be categorized as black/brown/blonde/red/grey/white (and perhaps a few more options for people who dye it). In R, categorical data is stored in factors. Given the importance of these factors in data analysis, you should start learning how to create, subset and compare them now!


### What's a factor and why would you use it?
In this chapter you dive into the wonderful world of factors.

The term factor refers to a statistical data type used to store categorical variables. The difference between a categorical variable and a continuous variable is that a categorical variable can belong to a limited number of categories. A continuous variable, on the other hand, can correspond to an infinite number of values.

It is important that R knows whether it is dealing with a continuous or a categorical variable, as the statistical models you will develop in the future treat both types differently. (You will see later why this is the case.)

A good example of a categorical variable is sex. In many circumstances you can limit the sex categories to "Male" or "Female". (Sometimes you may need different categories. For example, you may need to consider chromosomal variation, hermaphroditic animals, or different cultural norms, but you will always have a finite number of categories.)

### What's a factor and why would you use it? (2)
To create factors in R, you make use of the function `factor()`. First thing that you have to do is create a vector that contains all the observations that belong to a limited number of categories. For example, `sex_vector` contains the sex of 5 different individuals:

```
sex_vector <- c("Male","Female","Female","Male","Male")
```

It is clear that there are two categories, or in R-terms 'factor levels', at work here: "Male" and "Female".

The function `factor()` will encode the vector as a factor:

```
factor_sex_vector <- factor(sex_vector)
```

### What's a factor and why would you use it? (3)
There are two types of categorical variables: a **nominal categorical variable** and an **ordinal categorical variable**.

A nominal variable is a categorical variable without an implied order. This means that it is impossible to say that 'one is worth more than the other'. For example, think of the categorical variable `animals_vector` with the categories `"Elephant"`, `"Giraffe"`, `"Donkey"` and `"Horse"`. Here, it is impossible to say that one stands above or below the other. (Note that some of you might disagree ;-) ).

In contrast, ordinal variables do have a natural ordering. Consider for example the categorical variable temperature_vector with the categories: `"Low"`, `"Medium"` and `"High"`. Here it is obvious that `"Medium"` stands above `"Low"`, and `"High"` stands above `"Medium"`.

```
# Animals
animals_vector <- c("Elephant", "Giraffe", "Donkey", "Horse")
factor_animals_vector <- factor(animals_vector)
factor_animals_vector

# Temperature
temperature_vector <- c("High", "Low", "High","Low", "Medium")
factor_temperature_vector <- factor(temperature_vector, order = TRUE, levels = c("Low", "Medium", "High"))
factor_temperature_vector
```

### Factor levels
```
levels(factor_vector) <- c("name1", "name2",...)
```

```
# Code to build factor_survey_vector
survey_vector <- c("M", "F", "F", "M", "M")
factor_survey_vector <- factor(survey_vector)

# Specify the levels of factor_survey_vector
levels(factor_survey_vector) <- c("Female", "Male")

factor_survey_vector
```

### Summarizing a factor
After finishing this course, one of your favorite functions in R will be `summary()`. This will give you a quick overview of the contents of a variable:

```
summary(my_var)
```

Going back to our survey, you would like to know how many `"Male"` responses you have in your study, and how many `"Female"` responses. The `summary()` function gives you the answer to this question.

```
# Build factor_survey_vector with clean levels
survey_vector <- c("M", "F", "F", "M", "M")
factor_survey_vector <- factor(survey_vector)
levels(factor_survey_vector) <- c("Female", "Male")
factor_survey_vector

# Generate summary for survey_vector
summary(survey_vector)

# Generate summary for factor_survey_vector
summary(factor_survey_vector)
```

result:

```
> # Generate summary for survey_vector
> summary(survey_vector)
   Length     Class      Mode
        5 character character
>
> # Generate summary for factor_survey_vector
> summary(factor_survey_vector)
Female   Male
     2      3
```

### Battle of the sexes
You might wonder what happens when you try to compare elements of a factor. In factor_survey_vector you have a factor with two levels: "Male" and "Female". But how does R value these relative to each other?

### Ordered factors (2)
`speed_vector` should be converted to an ordinal factor since its categories have a natural ordering. By default, the function `factor()` transforms `speed_vector` into an unordered factor. To create an ordered factor, you have to add two additional arguments: `ordered` and `levels`.

```
factor(some_vector,
       ordered = TRUE,
       levels = c("lev1", "lev2" ...))
```

By setting the argument `ordered` to `TRUE` in the function factor(), you indicate that the factor is ordered. With the argument `levels` you give the values of the factor in the correct order.


### Comparing ordered factors

```
# Create factor_speed_vector
speed_vector <- c("medium", "slow", "slow", "medium", "fast")
factor_speed_vector <- factor(speed_vector, ordered = TRUE, levels = c("slow", "medium", "fast"))

# Factor value for second data analyst
da2 <- factor_speed_vector[2]

# Factor value for fifth data analyst
da5 <- factor_speed_vector[5]


# Is data analyst 2 faster than data analyst 5?
da2 > da5
```
