Most data sets you will be working with will be stored as data frames. By the end of this chapter focused on R basics, you will be able to create a data frame, select interesting parts of a data frame and order a data frame according to certain variables.

### What's a data frame?
You may remember from the chapter about matrices that all the elements that you put in a matrix should be of the same type. Back then, your data set on Star Wars only contained numeric elements.

When doing a market research survey, however, you often have questions such as:

* 'Are your married?' or 'yes/no' questions (`logical`)
* 'How old are you?' (`numeric`)
* 'What is your opinion on this product?' or other 'open-ended' questions (`character`)
* ...

The output, namely the respondents' answers to the questions formulated above, is a data set of different data types. You will often find yourself working with data sets that contain different data types instead of only one.

A data frame has the variables of a data set as columns and the observations as rows. This will be a familiar concept for those coming from different statistical software packages such as SAS or SPSS.

### Quick, have a look at your data set
Wow, that is a lot of cars!

Working with large data sets is not uncommon in data analysis. When you work with (extremely) large data sets and data frames, your first task as a data analyst is to develop a clear understanding of its structure and main elements. Therefore, it is often useful to show only a small part of the entire data set.

So how to do this in R? Well, the function `head()` enables you to show the first observations of a data frame. Similarly, the function `tail()` prints out the last observations in your data set.

Both `head()` and `tail()` print a top line called the 'header', which contains the names of the different variables in your data set.

### Have a look at the structure
Another method that is often used to get a rapid overview of your data is the function `str()`. The function `str()` shows you the structure of your data set. For a data frame it tells you:

* The total number of observations (e.g. 32 car types)
* The total number of variables (e.g. 11 car features)
* A full list of the variables names (e.g. mpg, cyl ... )
* The data type of each variable (e.g. num)
* The first observations
Applying the `str()` function will often be the first thing that you do when receiving a new data set or data frame. It is a great way to get more insight in your data set before diving into the real analysis.


### Creating a data frame

```
# Definition of vectors
name <- c("Mercury", "Venus", "Earth", "Mars", "Jupiter", "Saturn", "Uranus", "Neptune")
type <- c("Terrestrial planet", "Terrestrial planet", "Terrestrial planet",
          "Terrestrial planet", "Gas giant", "Gas giant", "Gas giant", "Gas giant")
diameter <- c(0.382, 0.949, 1, 0.532, 11.209, 9.449, 4.007, 3.883)
rotation <- c(58.64, -243.02, 1, 1.03, 0.41, 0.43, -0.72, 0.67)
rings <- c(FALSE, FALSE, FALSE, FALSE, TRUE, TRUE, TRUE, TRUE)

# Create a data frame from the vectors
planets_df <- data.frame(name, type, diameter, rotation, rings)
```

planets_df бол ингээд data set болж байгаа юм

### Selection of data frame elements
Similar to vectors and matrices, you select elements from a data frame with the help of square brackets `[ ]`. By using a comma, you can indicate what to select from the rows and the columns respectively. For example:

* `my_df[1,2]` selects the value at the first row and second column in `my_df`.
* `my_df[1:3,2:4]` selects rows 1, 2, 3 and columns 2, 3, 4 in `my_df`.

Sometimes you want to select all elements of a row or column. For example, `my_df[1, ]` selects all elements of the first row. Let us now apply this technique on `planets_df`!


### Selection of data frame elements (2)
Instead of using numerics to select elements of a data frame, you can also use the variable names to select columns of a data frame.

Suppose you want to select the first three elements of the `type` column. One way to do this is

```
planets_df[1:3,1]
```

A possible disadvantage of this approach is that you have to know (or look up) the column number of `type`, which gets hard if you have a lot of variables. It is often easier to just make use of the variable name:

```
planets_df[1:3,"type"]
```

### ALSO
```
planets_df[,3]
planets_df[,"diameter"]
```

However, there is a short-cut. If your columns have names, you can use the `$` sign:

```
planets_df$diameter
```

```
rings_vector <- planets_df$rings

# Print out rings_vector
rings_vector

planets_df[rings_vector, "name"]

# Adapt the code to select all columns for planets with rings
planets_df[rings_vector, ]
```

### subset

Now, let us move up one level and use the function `subset()`. You should see the `subset()` function as a short-cut to do exactly the same as what you did in the previous exercises.

```
subset(my_df, subset = some_condition)
```

The first argument of `subset()` specifies the data set for which you want a subset. By adding the second argument, you give R the necessary information and conditions to select the correct subset.

The code below will give the exact same result as you got in the previous exercise, but this time, you didn't need the `rings_vector`!

```
subset(planets_df, subset = rings)
```

### Sorting
Making and creating rankings is one of mankind's favorite affairs. These rankings can be useful (best universities in the world), entertaining (most influential movie stars) or pointless (best 007 look-a-like).

In data analysis you can sort your data according to a certain variable in the data set. In R, this is done with the help of the function `order()`.

`order()` is a function that gives you the ranked position of each element when it is applied on a variable, such as a vector for example:

```
> a <- c(100, 10, 1000)
> order(a)
[1] 2 1 3
```

10, which is the second element in `a`, is the smallest element, so 2 comes first in the output of `order(a)`. 100, which is the first element in `a` is the second smallest element, so 1 comes second in the output of `order(a)`.

This means we can use the output of `order(a)` to reshuffle `a`:

```
> a[order(a)]
[1]   10  100 1000
```

```
# planets_df is pre-loaded in your workspace

# Use order() to create positions
positions <- order(planets_df$diameter)

# Use positions to sort planets_df
planets_df[positions, ]
```
