Lists, why would you need them?
Congratulations! At this point in the course you are already familiar with:

* Vectors (one dimensional array): can hold numeric, character or logical values. **The elements in a vector all have the same data type**.
* Matrices (two dimensional array): can hold numeric, character or logical values. **The elements in a matrix all have the same data type**.
* Data frames (two-dimensional objects): can hold numeric, character or logical values. **Within a column all elements have the same data type, but different columns can be of different data type**.

### Lists, why would you need them? (2)
A **list** in R is similar to your to-do list at work or school: the different items on that list most likely differ in length, characteristic, type of activity that has to do be done, ...

A list in R allows you to gather a variety of objects under one name (that is, the name of the list) in an ordered way. These objects can be matrices, vectors, data frames, even other lists, etc. It is not even required that these objects are related to each other in any way.

You could say that a list is some kind super data type: you can store practically any piece of information in it!

### Creating a list
Let us create our first list! To construct a list you use the function `list()`:

```
my_list <- list(comp1, comp2 ...)
```

The arguments to the list function are the list components. Remember, these components can be matrices, vectors, other lists, ...

### Creating a named list
Well done, you're on a roll!

Just like on your to-do list, you want to avoid not knowing or remembering what the components of your list stand for. That is why you should give names to them:

```
my_list <- list(name1 = your_comp1,
                name2 = your_comp2)
```

This creates a list with components that are named `name1`, `name2`, and so on. If you want to name your lists after you've created them, you can use the `names()` function as you did with vectors. The following commands are fully equivalent to the assignment above:

```
my_list <- list(your_comp1, your_comp2)
names(my_list) <- c("name1", "name2")
```

### Selecting elements from a list
Your list will often be built out of numerous elements and components. Therefore, getting a single element, multiple elements, or a component out of it is not always straightforward.

One way to select a component is using the numbered position of that component. For example, to "grab" the first component of `shining_list` you type

```
shining_list[[1]]
```

A quick way to check this out is typing it in the console. Important to remember: to select elements from vectors, you use single square brackets: `[ ]`. Don't mix them up!

You can also refer to the names of the components, with `[[ ]]` or with the `$` sign. Both will select the data frame representing the reviews:

```
shining_list[["reviews"]]
shining_list$reviews
```

Besides selecting components, you often need to select specific elements out of these components. For example, with `shining_list[[2]][1]` you select from the second component, `actors` (`shining_list[[2]]`), the first element (`[1]`). When you type this in the console, you will see the answer is Jack Nicholson.


### Adding more movie information to the list
Being proud of your first list, you shared it with the members of your movie hobby club. However, one of the senior members, a guy named M. McDowell, noted that you forgot to add the release year. Given your ambitions to become next year's president of the club, you decide to add this information to the list.

To conveniently add elements to lists you can use the `c()` function, that you also used to build vectors:

```
ext_list <- c(my_list , my_val)
```

This will simply extend the original list, `my_list`, with the component `my_val`. This component gets appended to the end of the list. If you want to give the new list item a name, you just add the name as you did before:

```
ext_list <- c(my_list, my_name = my_val)
```
